Welcome to Perspectives from HSBC,thanks for joining us and now onto today's show.
Hello everyone,thanks for joining HSBC podcast series of perspectives.
Today's episode is being recorded behind the scene at the HSBC Global Investment Summit happening in Hong Kong.
My name is Jing Nu,HSBC Chief China Economist.
I'm very pleased to be joined by Ke Yu Jing,professor of economics at Harvard University and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
So today we're going to talk about China's economic development and its new playbook.
Hi Ke Yu.
Good to be with you Jing.
We have a lot to talk about.
Nowadays we see a lot of trading partners in addition to US.
Start to complain about China is getting too competitive in it export.
And some people are saying that China is exporting deflation.
Apparently,especially with the US China trade tension,some other economies start to worry about.
They might see more inflow of Chinese goods that could,to some extent,
put some pressure on their domestic manufacturing.
So what's your review on this?
I do believe that there is a structural issue at heart that needs to be solved over time for the benefit of China for the rest of the world.
And indeed to maintain China's position as a global player in the world,
that the model is steered towards the scaling up supply.
The whole,the local governments are not incentivized to spend as much on social services as they are nurturing champions.
Whether it's BYD or Neo or deepseek,although deepseek is not actually backed by local governments.
But the idea of a plan,the idea is to nurture these kind of companies.
But they really should be spending more on social services to give the boost in demand.
And also,Chinese companies are really competitive.
And it has very little to do with subsidies.
If you look at majority of manufacturing,90% of manufacturing companies,
there is no over investment.
Actually,it is responding to market forces.
The 10% is some of the new sectors.
But in general,that's going to cause tension.
The fact that China absolutely dominates so much in manufacturing is going to be a problem for other developing countries.
And I think there will be a backlash until they structure that,they redress that imbalance.
And how to do that?
Well,I mean,the easiest way is still coming back to domestic demand.
But maybe they need to have some voluntary restraints on exports as well.
That's a very interesting point you are mentioning.
Because we also noticed that China seems to be trying to address the issue with both the demand side and supply side.
On the demand side,its pivot towards stimulating consumption might be one way.
Also start to talk about sector-specific measures in order to cut the capacity.
And as you said,it may be restrict the export.
Does the outbound of the Iraq investment also play a role?
I think outbound direct investment is very much encouraged by the rest of the world,
well,with the exception of countries that don't welcome Chinese money,which is,I think,is not not smart.
But,you know,that's the fact.
If you look at around the developing world,actually,in the world today,there's a massive deficit in investment.
Agri-investment in the world is down,especially to developing countries.
And some countries needs to fill that gap.
I think China is very just doing so by not only investing,but maybe bringing some of its technology,
but it really need to obviously help the local economy build its own economy on its own feet.
And so,I think that should continue.That's a very different set of issues from exporting goods
where developing countries could also manufacture things as well.
Yeah,this kind of resemble what Japan did in the last century.
Japan ramped up the outbounded direct investment after a plaza called,
and then as an alternative to the export.
Do you think China will kind of looking to that kind of solution?
I don't see where it could be a substitute for exports
because you know investment abroad is obviously buying assets globally,
which is good for diversification of Chinese wealth,but it has a very different implication
from Chinese suppliers and Chinese companies being able to sell to the rest of the world.
But one thing that we do need to keep in mind is that China is actually looking more and more like a big and rich country.
So if you look at its export share of GDP,it's actually falling over time and converging to the US and Europe,
which means that it's absorbing more of its own goods.
And I think that's just a trend that it will continue.
I think they just need to think about whether I still come back to this model issue,
because just 80 cities in China do 80 cities really all need to do EVs.
Do they all need to do solar panels because it's a policy?
So there is too much competition because there's a lot of resources developing on one thing.
So rather than doing the same thing,they should find how to do complementary things as well.
So there are lots of things in the economy that can still be adjusted to address this problem.
There seem to be a lot of focus on stimulating domestic demand in particular on consumption side.
And actually just several days after the National People's Congress,China rose out a very comprehensive plan on stimulating the consumption.
So can you discuss a little bit about that?
Well,first of all,I think that China's model,or let me be precise,political economy model,
is really brilliant at scaling up supply,and quite weak at raising personal consumption,
and therefore demand.
And that has caused a lot of not only domestic issues,but raise some international controversies as well.
Consumption is the big focus now.
The government is steadfast,focused on raising consumption.
That was very different from,let's say,10,20 years ago,where the focus was much more on supply on the firms.
The whole economy was geared to subsidize supply,basically,and very weak focus on demand.
Now,there's a cyclical and structural component to raising consumption that I think deserves differentiation.
But cyclically,in the last few years,a lot of was precautionary saving.
It was due to low wages or low growth in real wages,and also expectations about the future.
I think people's expectations about jobs and the future is not as rosy as it was before,so they want to save.
And,of course,the household balance sheet was also weakened by the real estate downturn.
More fundamentally,it's the rural population,hundreds of millions of people still have a lack of access to social insurance and social infrastructure.
Now,if we dig a little bit deeper,it also stems from the tax structure,which I think there has to be performed as well,
very narrow tax base,income tax base,but also the government is heavily reliant on indirect taxation like VAT.
So direct taxation,which helps with redistribution,is quite weak.
And then the secondary redistribution through social insurance is obviously also inadequate given that rule.
Consumers have what an average of 5% of an average pension of the urban household.
And also the 300 million migrant workers,you know,they have even with the same income as an urban worker,
they spend only one third of that equivalent of a consumption of urban worker.
So this is the focus of the current government.
So I want to follow up on that.
Actually,this sounds like a very ambitious plan.
When we look at that,there's a mention of in the future,the migrant workers and their families can tap into the basic public services,
basically according to their permanent residence.
In the past,we have seen China trying to push forward the household registration reform,but we've limited success.
So what makes it different this time?
First of all,there's a real intention that they need to stabilize the real estate problem.
And there is sufficient demand if urbanization can continue and rural population can be properly integrated into the formal economy.
But also,I still think that there are challenges because local governments,they operate in their own kind of autonomous sort of way,
like any other government they care about social stability.
Maybe this is very politically incorrect to mention this,but it's kind of like the immigration issue,right?
When you have lots of people coming into their jurisdiction,what do they do about local employment and jobs and stability and so forth?
So I think there are some challenges,but one example is in Tianjin,they want to obviously stabilize the real estate sector.
So one policy they proposed was,well,anyone who buys a property here can have access to local schools.
That will stimulate a lot of demand.
So you see that?There's still a lot of controls in place in China,even in the first tier cities and property and the social infrastructure.
And if you loosen them,there will be a proper rebound of domestic demand.
Yeah,mentioning about the school choice,just remind me of another city,the capital city of Inner Mongolia,
which actually roll out these subsidies for child care,including if a family have three children,
then they can pretty much choose wherever their kids go to school.
So it's also a big step for Chinese government to start subsidizing the child care and maybe elderly care as well.
Well,I think that's the right thing to do.I think that China has to learn from other countries that have been relatively successful in raising fertility.
And obviously providing child care services,obviously,gives more freedom to the working women of the household.
And this is the kind of social services that will not only stimulate things like fertility,but also free up some resources for demand.
So I think lots of lessons to be learned from those countries.
What type of a structural reform would be necessary in order to push China to make those changes?
Like in the past,probably if one city government managed to invite more manufacturers to set shopping in their place,
then they actually get rewarded by tax and many other things.So what needs to be changed?
It is true that unless a few fundamental core challenges in the Chinese economy is not resolved over time,
you're going to continue with that imbalance,whether China's economic week or economically strong.
And what is the relationship between local and central government?
Local governments still have the burden of taking up the majority of the expenditure and the social and the local economy,
but it obviously relied in the past a lot on land sales and real estate as a source of revenue.
And they have to ramp up a lot of debt to undertake those kind of responsibilities.
But maybe the local government,KPI,should be changed from looking at GDP growth and investment to other things.
Maybe consumption,maybe jobs,you think these things through,but it has to be more balanced approach.
I think that another fundamental reform should be the redistribution system taxation.
I think still lots of people are not paying taxes and direct income taxes is not very strong as a redistributionary force.
A lot of the wealthy people are not really paying very high tax rates.It's actually in the end a bit regressive given that the tax system relies a lot of us at a global issue.
It is a global issue,but China is not going to escape from that.
But actually Chinese taxation is more regressive than in many other advanced economies.
But again,coming back to the social protection,social insurance,once people think that they have sustained rising wages and employment security,
they're obviously going to be more free to spend that with some kind of consumption.
What about housing market?Are you still worried about the housing market?
The real estate downturn,I think,is the really the primary factor causing China's cyclical economic downturn in the last few years,
because the property sector really went beyond property,unlike in other countries,which all had their ups and downs in property,
because it represented two core pillars of the economy,a shadow fiscal system and a shadow financial system.
Something like 90% of local government debt is tied to real estate,and 70% of national debt is tied to real estate.
And talking about this,coming back to this mayor economy,political economy model,there was an urbanization craze.
They actually went through,they went from industrialization craze to urbanization craze because property becoming even easier source of revenue.
And so when that came down,it brought really down to pillars of the economy.
So stabilizing real estate is absolutely crucial.
In a good scenario,five to seven years,stabilizing,trying to come about.
Now,you're already seeing signs to seven years,counting starting from 2022.
So we're halfway in the good scenario.
And that's coming from international data.That scenario will be 10 years,so I think if you look at the wealth effect,
if Chinese people's wealth really drop by a third that has major consequences on consumption as well.
So you really need to stabilize real estate to build that foundation for a stable rebound.
But also to mention that you're seeing signs of a transition already in the economic structure,
a bit away from the real estate into broadly categorized as high tech center.
So the government coming back to the recent Congress really is focusing on two things.
Consumption,so domestic demand and productivity based on innovation.
Yeah,indeed.We have seen some green shoots in terms of housing stabilization.
And in terms of business confidence,I think deepseek disruption really has made a big difference.
Well,it was interesting because I was still debating foreign policy on peak China,the concept of peak China.
I went from peak China to a few months later,deepseek moment,a major pendulum swing.
And I keep on having to remind the Western audience that this isn't what always happens when you predict China like that,
going from collapse,oops,second edition collapse,oops,no,third edition,then peak China.
Oh,and then deepseek,and suddenly everybody's interested in China again,right?
Yeah,nobody's talking about China is uninvestable.
Not anymore.And that was a major thing.
More clients are asking me about what's going on in China,what kind of the next deepseek moment will be.
Exactly.So this is what I've been trying to argue that China's fundamentals are there.
China's long-term potential is there.Just look at the people,the skills,the hard work,the scale,the market,the innovation.
Yes,in a short-term confidence has been the major hindrance to the Chinese economic situation.
But that's also very hard to rebuild,of course,but the fundamentals are there.
It's a very different country from just the normal countries that form to the middle-income trap.
Yeah,indeed.I think nobody would expect all of us on the tech companies and other type of companies are interested in increase the capex.
Because of the deepseek,because of the potential of integrating AI into their production.
Actually,deepseek caught the world by surprise.
But I don't think it caught China by that much of a surprise.
Of course,Chinese people were thrilled because,hey,look,it will happen to these export controls and tech restrictions.
They're able to make these major achievements.
Because if we look in live in China,observe that the daily lives,innovation is happening here and there all the time.
Breakthroughs,small and large are at every level.
So that's something to keep in mind.
And it does permeate throughout the economy.
The interesting thing is that I don't think this is head-on competition with the US.
US does these breakthroughs,more systematic model-based.
The Chinese applications are really,really useful.
Because ultimately,the success of the technology and how much it actually impacts the economy depends on how much it's adopted,how accessible it is,and how much it permeates throughout society and everyday lives.
And Chinese applications and Chinese technology are very much suited for that.
Because I think the approach of Chinese innovators,first start from trying to address a problem,solve a problem.
And if we look at much of the developing world,it really isn't about access to advanced technologies that matters.
But it's really about adoptability.
Very interesting.
Since you mentioned about the US-China rivalry,maybe we can end with that question.
So do you think it's still possible for China and US to reach a deal?What would the deal look like?
You know,it's very interesting that Mr.Trump or President Trump his view of China seems to be evolving over time.
We don't really know,but I think that in terms of competition,it's always going to be there.
US and Japan competition was quite ferocious in major tech sectors,but it really pushed US to improve.
US to spend a lot more on its innovation system and reform its innovation system.
And in turn,so did Japan,and as a result,we all have cheaper,better products.
So for investors,at least from what I'm observing,if I were an investor,I think about being in both camps,if I can,to the extent possible.
Because there'll be some that will be successful in China and the US.
And you just don't know,you don't know which one,because both have its respective advantages.
But it's also,on a more sanguine note,it's also less likely that they're going to converge rather than move in parallel.
Thanks for sitting down with us and discuss all those interesting issues today.
Hope to see you again in the near future.Thanks.
Thank you for joining us for this episode of Perspectives.
Make sure you're subscribed to HSBC Global Viewpoint to stay connected.